MTA-2812 (#1322)
scaleway/docs-content: compute/instances/troubleshooting/bootscript-eol.mdx

tags: bootscript boot-script instance boot script
dates:
  validation: 2023-02-20
  posted: 2023-02-20
categories:
  - compute
---

Certain older legacy Instance types (e.g. **VC1-x**, **X64-x**, **Start1-x**, and **Stardust**) proposed the option to use a bootscript (a preconfigured boot configuration) to start your Instances. This option has become deprecated and will no longer be supported.
If you are still using one of these Instance types, you have to change your boot configuration in order to maintain your Instance operational.

<Macro id="iam-requirements" />

<Message type="requirement">
  - You have an account and are logged into the [Scaleway console](https://console.scaleway.com)
  - You have [created your SSH key and added it to your account](/console/my-project/how-to/create-ssh-key/)
  - You have [an Instance](/compute/instances/how-to/create-an-instance) using a bootscript
</Message>

## Migration options for Instances using bootscripts

### Instance using bootscript method and an old OS image without UEFI

The following options apply to most of the existing **VC1-x**, **X64-x**, **Start1-x**, and **Stardust** Instances.

<Message type="important">

>   Local volume(s) not supporting UEFI cannot be used to boot any other type of Instance. You have to retrieve your data and manually migrate it to a Instance supporting UEFI boot. There is no way on Scaleway side to identify which customer is using OS image with / without UEFI partition. Only the user can find out looking into his volume.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Local volume(s) not supporting UEFI cannot be used to boot any other type of Instance. You have to retrieve your data and manually migrate it to a Instance supporting UEFI boot. Unfortunately we cannot identify, on the Scaleway side, which customers are using OS images with / without UEFI partition. This can only be identified by the user themselves, looking into their volumes.
```

</Message>

#### Option 1: Create a unified snapshot of the volume(s) and rebuild block volume(s) from the snapshot

1. [Create a snapshot](/compute/instances/how-to/create-a-snapshot/) of the volume using the **unified** snapshot type.
2. [Create a new block volume](/storage/block/how-to/create-a-volume) from the previous unified snapshot.
3. [Create and start](/compute/instances/how-to/create-an-instance/) a new Instance using its own boot volume in local boot mode.
4. [Attach](/storage/block/how-to/attach-a-volume/) the block volume to the new Instance.

> 5. Once logged into the instance, [mount the partition](/storage/block/how-to/mount-and-use-volume/) available in the block volume and access your data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Once logged into the Instance, [mount the partition](/storage/block/how-to/mount-and-use-volume/) available in the block volume and access your data.
```

6. Delete the old Instance that was using a bootscript once the migration is completed.

#### Option 2: Create a unified snapshot of the volume(s) and export it to S3 to retrieve the data

1. [Create a snapshot](/compute/instances/how-to/create-a-snapshot/) of the volume using the **unified** or **l_ssd** type of snapshot.
2. [Export](/compute/instances/how-to/snapshot-import-export-feature) the snapshot to a S3 bucket in the same region as the Instance.

> 3. Retrieve your data from the Object Storage bucket and reuse them at your convenience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Retrieve your data from the Object Storage bucket and reuse it at your convenience.
```

4. Delete the old Instance that was using a bootscript once you have recovered your data.

#### Option 3: Create a new Instance using local boot method and manually copy data from the old Instance to the new one.

> [Migrate the data](/dedibox/dedicated-servers/how-to/migrate-server/) of your old instance manually. For example using FTP, SCP or Rsync.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Migrate the data](/dedibox/dedicated-servers/how-to/migrate-server/) of your old Instance manually. You can do this by using FTP, SCP or Rsync, for example.
```

<Message type="important">
  Old volumes (prior 2018) which include QCOW backing chains are currently not supported in the unified snapshot / snapshot transfer logic. For volumes using backing chains, options 1 and 2 are not applicable.
</Message>

### Instance using bootscript method and an OS image with UEFI

#### Option 4: Change the boot type of the Instance to local boot

[Change the boot type](/compute/instances/how-to/use-boot-modes/#how-to-use-local-boot) of the Instance to **Local boot**.

1. [Stop](/compute/instances/how-to/power-off-instance/) or [pause](/compute/instances/how-to/use-standby-mode/) the Instance.
2. [Change the boot type](/compute/instances/how-to/use-boot-modes/#how-to-use-local-boot) to local boot.
3. Start or resume execution of the Instance.

> 4. Check that the instance is booting correctly with the local boot method and that his services are behaving correctly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Check that the Instance is booting correctly with the local boot method and that its services are behaving correctly.
```

<Message type="tip">

>   If changing the boot type from bootscript to local boot is not successful by using option 4, you can always use option 1, 2 or 3 to migrate your Instance data to a new one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  If changing the boot type from bootscript to local boot is not successfully achieved via option 4, you can always use option 1, 2 or 3 to migrate your Instance data to a new one.
```

</Message>

<Message type="tip">

>   If you are a Stardust user, we recommend you to stop the VM from the a VM shell so that the VM itself is in `stopped_in_place` state. This ensures your Instance will not lose its slot due to availability shortages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  If you are a Stardust user, we recommend that you stop the VM from the VM shell, so that the VM itself is in `stopped_in_place` state. This ensures your Instance will not lose its slot in the case of availability shortages.
```

  posted: 2023-02-20
categories:
  - compute
---

Certain older legacy Instance types (e.g. **VC1-x**, **X64-x**, **Start1-x**) offered the default option to use a bootscript (a preconfigured boot configuration) to start your Instance. This boot method is also available on **DEV1-x**, **GP1-x**, and **STARDUST1** Instances. The bootscript option has become deprecated and will no longer be supported.
If you are still using one of these Instance types with a bootscript, you have to change your boot configuration in order to keep your Instance operational.

<Macro id="iam-requirements" />

<Message type="requirement">
  - You have an account and are logged into the [Scaleway console](https://console.scaleway.com)
  - You have [created your SSH key and added it to your account](/console/my-project/how-to/create-ssh-key/)
  - You have [an Instance](/compute/instances/how-to/create-an-instance) using a bootscript
</Message>

## Migration options for Instances using bootscripts

<Message type="important">
  Local volume(s) that do not support UEFI cannot be used to boot any other type of Instance. You must retrieve and manually migrate your data to an Instance that supports UEFI boot.  

>   Unfortunately, we cannot identify, on the Scaleway side, which customers are using OS images with or without UEFI partitions. The user themselves can only identify this.   

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Unfortunately, Scaleway cannot access your data to identify if you are using an OS image with or without UEFI partitions.
```

  To do so, [connect to your Instance](/compute/instances/how-to/connect-to-instance) using SSH and run the following command to list the EFI directories:
  ```
  ls -ld /sys/firmware/efi
  ```
  If you can see the following output, your Instance uses UEFI boot:
  ```
  root@my-virtual-instance:~# ls -ld /sys/firmware/efi
  drwxr-xr-x 6 root root 0 Feb 20 11:16 /sys/firmware/EFI
  ```

>   In this case use **option 4** to migrate your data.    

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  In this case use **option 4** to migrate your Instance.
```

  If you see `ls: cannot access /sys/firmware/efi: No such file or directory` the UEFI directories are not present on your Instance. Migrate your data using **option 1, 2 or 3**.
</Message>

### Instances using bootscript method and an old OS image without UEFI

Most of the existing **VC1-x**, **X64-x**, and **Start1-x** Instances fall into this category.

#### Option 1: Create a unified snapshot of the volume(s) and rebuild block volume(s) from the snapshot

> 

Reviewer 2: We need a short description to explain what the user is doing.

```suggestion

This section explains how to create a new instance from an OS image which supports Local Boot using UEFI and how to access you data on the newly created Instance. This is the recommended procedure if your Instance does not support UEFI.

```

5. Once logged into the Instance, [mount the partition](/storage/block/how-to/mount-and-use-volume/) available in the block volume and access your data.
6. Delete the old Instance that was using a bootscript once the migration is completed.

#### Option 2: Create a snapshot of the volume(s) and export it to S3 to retrieve the data

1. [Create a snapshot](/compute/instances/how-to/create-a-snapshot/) of the volume using the **unified** or **l_ssd** type of snapshot.
2. [Export](/compute/instances/how-to/snapshot-import-export-feature) the snapshot to an S3 bucket in the same region as the Instance.
3. Retrieve your data from the Object Storage bucket and reuse it at your convenience.
4. Delete the old Instance that was using a bootscript once you have recovered your data.

#### Option 3: Create a new Instance using the local boot method and manually copy data from the old Instance to the new one.

Migrate the data of your old Instance manually. For example, you can do this by using FTP, SCP, or Rsync.

### Instances using the bootscript method and an OS image with UEFI

#### Option 4: Change the boot type of the Instance to local boot

> To continue using your current Instance, [change the boot type](/compute/instances/how-to/use-boot-modes/#how-to-use-local-boot) of the Instance to **Local boot**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**This section only applies if your Instance supports UEFI boot.** To continue using your current Instance, [change the boot type](/compute/instances/how-to/use-boot-modes/#how-to-use-local-boot) of the Instance to **Local boot** :
```

---
meta:
  title: Dealing with the end of life of the bootscript feature
  description: This page helps you troubleshoot issues related to the EOL of the bootscript feature
content:
  h1: Dealing with the end of life of the bootscript feature
  paragraph: This page helps you troubleshoot issues related to the EOL of the bootscript feature
tags: bootscript boot-script instance boot script
dates:
  validation: 2023-02-20
  posted: 2023-02-20
categories:
  - compute
---

> Certain older legacy Instance types (e.g. **VC1-x**, **X64-x**, **Start1-x**, and **Stardust**) offered the option to use a bootscript (a preconfigured boot configuration) to start your Instance. This option has become deprecated and will no longer be supported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Certain older legacy Instance types (e.g. **VC1-x**, **X64-x**, **Start1-x**, and **Stardust**) offered the default option to use a bootscript (a preconfigured boot configuration) to start your Instance. This option has become deprecated and will no longer be supported.
```

> If you are still using one of these Instance types, you have to change your boot configuration in order to keep your Instance operational.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are still using one of these Instance types with a bootscript, you have to change your boot configuration in order to keep your Instance operational.
```

<Macro id="iam-requirements" />

<Message type="requirement">
  - You have an account and are logged into the [Scaleway console](https://console.scaleway.com)
  - You have [created your SSH key and added it to your account](/console/my-project/how-to/create-ssh-key/)
  - You have [an Instance](/compute/instances/how-to/create-an-instance) using a bootscript
</Message>

## Migration options for Instances using bootscripts

### Instance using bootscript method and an old OS image without UEFI

> The following options apply to most of the existing **VC1-x**, **X64-x**, **Start1-x**, and **Stardust** Instances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most of the existing **VC1-x**, **X64-x**, **Start1-x**, and **Stardust** Instances fall into this category.
```

<Message type="important">

>   Local volume(s) not supporting UEFI cannot be used to boot any other type of Instance. You have to retrieve your data and manually migrate it to a Instance supporting UEFI boot.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Local volume(s) not supporting UEFI cannot be used to boot any other type of Instance. You will therefore have to retrieve your data and manually migrate it to a Instance supporting UEFI boot.  
```

>   Unfortunately we cannot identify, on the Scaleway side, which customers are using OS images with / without UEFI partition. This can only be identified by the user themselves.   

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Unfortunately we cannot identify, on the Scaleway side, which customers are using OS images with / without UEFI. This can only be identified by the user themselves.   
```

  To do so, connect to your Instance using SSH and run the following command to list the EFI directories:
  ```
  ls -ld /sys/firmware/efi
  ```

>   If the you can see the following output, your Instances uses UEFI boot:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  If the you can see the following output, your Instances uses UEFI boot:
```
It's not clear to me what the user then needs to do (it's confusing with all the "Instances not supporting x cannot do y" stuff). Can we say which option they need to follow (and the same for if they find the Instance uses BIOS boot)

Author: updated the information

2. [Create a new block volume](/storage/block/how-to/create-a-volume) from the previous unified snapshot.
3. [Create and start](/compute/instances/how-to/create-an-instance/) a new Instance using its own boot volume in local boot mode.
4. [Attach](/storage/block/how-to/attach-a-volume/) the block volume to the new Instance.
5. Once logged into the Instance, [mount the partition](/storage/block/how-to/mount-and-use-volume/) available in the block volume and access your data.
6. Delete the old Instance that was using a bootscript once the migration is completed.

#### Option 2: Create a unified snapshot of the volume(s) and export it to S3 to retrieve the data

1. [Create a snapshot](/compute/instances/how-to/create-a-snapshot/) of the volume using the **unified** or **l_ssd** type of snapshot.
2. [Export](/compute/instances/how-to/snapshot-import-export-feature) the snapshot to a S3 bucket in the same region as the Instance.
3. Retrieve your data from the Object Storage bucket and reuse it at your convenience.
4. Delete the old Instance that was using a bootscript once you have recovered your data.

> #### Option 3: Create a new Instance using local boot method and manually copy data from the old Instance to the new one.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Option 3: Create a new Instance using the local boot method and manually copy data from the old Instance to the new one.
```

[Migrate the data](/dedibox/dedicated-servers/how-to/migrate-server/) of your old Instance manually. You can do this by using FTP, SCP or Rsync, for example.

<Message type="important">

>   Old volumes (prior 2018) which include QCOW backing chains are currently not supported in the unified snapshot / snapshot transfer logic. For volumes using backing chains, options 1 and 2 are not applicable.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Old volumes (prior to 2018) which include QCOW backing chains are currently not supported in the unified snapshot/snapshot transfer logic. For volumes using backing chains, options 1 and 2 are not applicable.
```

</Message>

> ### Instances using bootscript method and an OS image with UEFI

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Instances using the bootscript method and an OS image with UEFI
```

---
meta:
  title: Dealing with the end of life of the bootscript feature
  description: This page helps you troubleshoot issues related to the EOL of the bootscript feature
content:
  h1: Dealing with the end of life of the bootscript feature
  paragraph: This page helps you troubleshoot issues related to the EOL of the bootscript feature
tags: bootscript boot-script instance boot script
dates:
  validation: 2023-02-20
  posted: 2023-02-20
categories:
  - compute
---

> Certain older legacy Instance types (e.g. **VC1-x**, **X64-x**, **Start1-x**, and **Stardust**) offered the default option to use a bootscript (a preconfigured boot configuration) to start your Instance. This option has become deprecated and will no longer be supported.

Reviewer 4: DEV1, GP1 and STARDUST1 instance type also support bootscript as a user selectable option.

Author: ```suggestion
Certain older legacy Instance types (e.g. **VC1-x**, **X64-x**, **Start1-x**, and **Stardust**) offered the default option to use a bootscript (a preconfigured boot configuration) to start your Instance. This boot method is also available as an option on **DEV1-x**, **GP1-x**, and **STARDUST1** Instances. The bootscript option has become deprecated and will no longer be supported.
```

> Certain older legacy Instance types (e.g. **VC1-x**, **X64-x**, **Start1-x**, and **Stardust**) offered the default option to use a bootscript (a preconfigured boot configuration) to start your Instance. This option has become deprecated and will no longer be supported.

Author: ```suggestion
Certain older legacy Instance types (e.g. **VC1-x**, **X64-x**, and**Start1-x**) and **Stardust** Instances offered the default option to use a bootscript (a preconfigured boot configuration) to start your Instance. This option has become deprecated and will no longer be supported.
```

</Message>

## Migration options for Instances using bootscripts

<Message type="important">
  Local volume(s) that do not support UEFI cannot be used to boot any other type of Instance. You must retrieve and manually migrate your data to an Instance that supports UEFI boot.  
  Unfortunately, we cannot identify, on the Scaleway side, which customers are using OS images with or without UEFI partitions. The user themselves can only identify this.   
  To do so, [connect to your Instance](/compute/instances/how-to/connect-to-instance) using SSH and run the following command to list the EFI directories:
  ```
  ls -ld /sys/firmware/efi
  ```
  If you can see the following output, your Instance uses UEFI boot:
  ```
  root@my-virtual-instance:~# ls -ld /sys/firmware/efi
  drwxr-xr-x 6 root root 0 Feb 20 11:16 /sys/firmware/EFI
  ```
  In this case use **option 4** to migrate your data.    
  If you see `ls: cannot access /sys/firmware/efi: No such file or directory` the UEFI directories are not present on your Instance. Migrate your data using **option 1, 2 or 3**.
</Message>

### Instances using bootscript method and an old OS image without UEFI

> Most of the existing **VC1-x**, **X64-x**, **Start1-x**, and **Stardust** Instances fall into this category.

Reviewer 4: not STARDUST

Author: ```suggestion
Most of the existing **VC1-x**, **X64-x**, and **Start1-x** Instances fall into this category.
```

#### Option 1: Create a unified snapshot of the volume(s) and rebuild block volume(s) from the snapshot

1. [Create a snapshot](/compute/instances/how-to/create-a-snapshot/) of the volume using the **unified** snapshot type.
2. [Create a new block volume](/storage/block/how-to/create-a-volume) from the previous unified snapshot.
3. [Create and start](/compute/instances/how-to/create-an-instance/) a new Instance using its own boot volume in local boot mode.
4. [Attach](/storage/block/how-to/attach-a-volume/) the block volume to the new Instance.
5. Once logged into the Instance, [mount the partition](/storage/block/how-to/mount-and-use-volume/) available in the block volume and access your data.
6. Delete the old Instance that was using a bootscript once the migration is completed.

> #### Option 2: Create a unified snapshot of the volume(s) and export it to S3 to retrieve the data

Reviewer 5: Here in the title, the snapshot type doesn't need to be `unified` (the first line of the instructions reflect that)

Author: ```suggestion
#### Option 2: Create a snapshot of the volume(s) and export it to S3 to retrieve the data
```

1. [Create a snapshot](/compute/instances/how-to/create-a-snapshot/) of the volume using the **unified** or **l_ssd** type of snapshot.
2. [Export](/compute/instances/how-to/snapshot-import-export-feature) the snapshot to an S3 bucket in the same region as the Instance.
3. Retrieve your data from the Object Storage bucket and reuse it at your convenience.
4. Delete the old Instance that was using a bootscript once you have recovered your data.

#### Option 3: Create a new Instance using the local boot method and manually copy data from the old Instance to the new one.

> [Migrate the data](/dedibox/dedicated-servers/how-to/migrate-server/) of your old Instance manually. You can do this by using FTP, SCP or Rsync, for example.

Reviewer 4: I believe this is not relevant for instance

Author: ```suggestion
Migrate the data of your old Instance manually. For example, you can do this by using FTP, SCP, or Rsync.
```

Author: ```suggestion
Migrate the data of your old Instance manually. For example, you can do this by using FTP, SCP, or Rsync.
```

<Message type="important">
  Old volumes (prior to 2018) which include QCOW backing chains are currently not supported in the unified snapshot/snapshot transfer logic. For volumes using backing chains, options 1 and 2 are not applicable.

> </Message>

Reviewer 4: Support for backing chain will be added by beginning of March so we can remove this message

Author: ```suggestion
```

Author: ```suggestion67,70,71
```

Reviewer 5: In any case I don't think users would have understood the meaning of the internal tech details

### Instances using the bootscript method and an OS image with UEFI

#### Option 4: Change the boot type of the Instance to local boot

> [Change the boot type](/compute/instances/how-to/use-boot-modes/#how-to-use-local-boot) of the Instance to **Local boot**.

Reviewer 6: Should this be step 1?

Author: nope
```suggestion
To continue using your current Instance, [change the boot type](/compute/instances/how-to/use-boot-modes/#how-to-use-local-boot) of the Instance to **Local boot**.
```

1. [Stop](/compute/instances/how-to/power-off-instance/) or [pause](/compute/instances/how-to/use-standby-mode/) the Instance.
2. [Change the boot type](/compute/instances/how-to/use-boot-modes/#how-to-use-local-boot) to local boot.
3. Start or resume execution of the Instance.
4. Check that the Instance is booting correctly with the local boot method and that its services are behaving correctly.

<Message type="tip">
  If changing the boot type from bootscript to local boot is not successfully achieved via option 4, you can always use option 1, 2 or 3 to migrate your Instance data to a new one.
</Message>

<Message type="tip">

>   If you are a Stardust user, we recommend that you stop the VM from the VM shell, so that the VM itself is in `stopped_in_place` state. This ensures your Instance will not lose its slot in the case of availability shortages.

Reviewer 4: STARDUST1

>   If you are a Stardust user, we recommend that you stop the VM from the VM shell, so that the VM itself is in `stopped_in_place` state. This ensures your Instance will not lose its slot in the case of availability shortages.

Reviewer 4: "[pause](/compute/instances/how-to/use-standby-mode/)" is definitely better handling

Author: ```suggestion
  If you are a **STARDUST1** user, we recommend that you put your VM into [standby mode](/compute/instances/how-to/use-standby-mode/). This ensures your Instance will not lose its slot in the case of availability shortages.
```

content:
  h1: Dealing with the end of life of the bootscript feature
  paragraph: This page helps you migrating your Instance following the EOL of the bootscript feature
tags: bootscript boot-script instance boot script
dates:
  validation: 2023-02-20
  posted: 2023-02-20
categories:
  - compute
---

Some legacy Instance types (e.g. **VC1-x**, **X64-x**, **Start1-x**) supported the option to use a bootscript (a preconfigured boot configuration) to start your Instance. This boot method was also available on **DEV1-x**, **GP1-x**, and **STARDUST1** Instances. This feature is deprecated and will no longer be supported.
If you are still using one of these Instance types with a bootscript, you have to change your boot configuration in order to keep your Instance operational.

<Macro id="iam-requirements" />

<Message type="requirement">
  - You have an account and are logged into the [Scaleway console](https://console.scaleway.com)
  - You have [created your SSH key and added it to your account](/console/my-project/how-to/create-ssh-key/)
  - You have [an Instance](/compute/instances/how-to/create-an-instance) using a bootscript
</Message>

## How do I know if I am impacted?

> If your Instance is using the bootscript option to boot in normal mode you are impacted. You can check directly from the Scaleway console, which boot mode uses your Instance.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If your Instance is using the bootscript option to boot in normal mode you are impacted. You can check which boot mode is used by your Instance directly in the Scaleway console.
```
